

Soot modeling in unsteady, one-dimensional flames using SootLib

Soot formation is a critical process in many combustion systems. Soot particles are pollutants that can cause health problems, damage the environment, and affect flame temperatures through radiative heat transfer. Flame temperatures influence the formation of soot and other pollutants. Accurately modeling soot is a difficult process because of the complex soot chemistry combined with a representation of the particle size distribution. SootLib is a library that has been developed by this group to allow access to several soot chemistry and particle size distribution models that can be integrated into existing combustion model codes. This work is an exercise on how the soot library can be used in an unsteady, one-dimensional flame code, also written by this group. The steady flame code from Cantera was compared against the group-created flame code without including soot formation, and the results were identical. Only the simplest soot models worked when SootLib was integrated with Cantera, so the unsteady flame code was written to allow for greater flexibility when introducing soot formation into the gas chemistry. The unsteady flame code can solve premixed and non-premixed flames. With this flame code, the different soot models were compared with each other as well as with experimental data. With several of the soot models, there was good agreement between the experimental and simulated data. Future work includes increasing the number of internal coordinates to allow for more complex soot chemistry and particle size distribution models. The flame code will also be expanded to allow for a flamelet progress variable approach with heat loss and table lookup.  

